# Postprocessing for NA-CORDEX-CMIP6
----------------------------------


## Current workflow

### Part 1: Extact variables from WRF output files and write CF- and CORDEX-compliant files

1. Run `extract.sh WRFDIR OUTDIR YEARS [CMDDIR]` to generate per-variable commandfiles for a range of years, where:
	* `WRFDIR` is the path to a directory containing subdirectories named `<year>_chunk` that contain raw WRF output files.
	* `OUTDIR` is the directory where you want postprocessed data
	* `YEARS` is a year or range of years (e.g., `1980-2023`) to postprocess.
	* `CMDDIR` is the directory where you want the commandfiles 


2. Inspect the resulting commandfiles and make sure they look sensible.  (See usage notes below for more info.)  For example:

	```
    python ./postprocess.core.variables.py /path/to/raw/WRF/data/1977_chunk \
      1980 uas /path/to/output
	```
3. Use `launch_multi` to run the commandfiles:

    ```
    launch_multi --run $rundir --wall 1:00:00 --mem 150GB\
      --copy postprocess.core.variables.py \
      --copy cmorize.compress.sh \
      --copy var_specs.yml \
      $cmddir/*.cmd
    ```  
    
4. After everything has finished, check captured output in the run directories.   If all of the `jobname.o[number].N` files end with a line that starts `Done`, and all the `step-NNNNN.out` files in the stdout directory are empty, you're all set.  Otherwise, debug and try again.  
(You can check this quickly using the following commands):

    ```
    wc */stdout*/*out
    grep Done */*.o* | cut -f 2 -d : | uniq -c
    ```


### Part 2: Aggregate hourly data to daily and daily to monthly

5. Run `aggregate.sh $indir $outdir $version $cmddir` where:

   * `$indir` contains the directories (one per variable) generated by
     `write.cmd.py`
   * `$outdir` is the directory where you want to generate a tree of output files
   * `$version` is the version number for the simulation
   * `$cmddir` is the directory where you want the commandfiles

   This will generate commandfiles to aggregate hourly variables to daily and place them in a directory tree following the CORDEX spec.  (It also copies/concatenates input files over where appropriate.)  We recommend writing to your scratch space, in case something goes wrong.

   The version number should look like "vYYYYMMDD", where Y/M/D is the year/month/day when the simulation completed.  You can find that date by running this command in the directory with the raw output:
   
   ```
   find *chunk -type f -name wrfout\* -printf "%T+\n" | sort | tail -1
   ```

6. Use `launch_multi` to run the commandfiles:
	
   ```
   launch_multi --run $rundir $cmddir/*cmd`
   ```

7. After all the jobs have finished, check the files in the run directory.  

8. Run `aggregate.sh` a second time to generate daily -> monthly commandfiles for the newly aggregated daily data.

9. Use `launch_multi` as before on the new commandfiles.

10. Check the outputs again.

11. Plot everything to check that he data looks goos.

12. Move the files to their final location.  

    The easiest way to do this is using Globus via the web UI, which will do it autonomously, in parallel, and with error checking.  Detailed instructions can be found in [NCAR's HPC documentation](https://ncar-hpc-docs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/storage-systems/data-transfer/globus/#transferring-files-with-the-web-interface).

### Usage Notes

#### `extract.sh`

NA-CORDEX simulations are run in decadal chunks with 2.5 years of spinup, so the raw WRF output for the years 1980-1989 will be in a subdirectory named `1977_chunk`; if you ask for data for 1988, extract.sh knows to use the files in `1977_chunk` and not the ones in `1987_chunk`, where they are part of the spin-up period for 1990-1999.

Postprocessed data is organized in subdirectories by variable (i.e., all the uas files are in subdirectory named `uas`, etc.)

If left unspecified, `CMDDIR` defaults to `.`

#### `launch_multi`

If you're running lots of tasks in parallel using commandfiles, sometimes things will go wrong for no particular reason, due to hardware hiccups or transient software problems.  So you need to check things afterwards to make sure everything ran correctly, which means you need to capture output from your processes.  

You can also have problems that only affect a subset of the data, so it's a good idea to have multiple commandfiles batched by something like variable or year; this makes it easier to track down problems and lets you avoid re-running the entire workflow.

However, `launch_cf` dumps any captured output into the directory that it is run from.  This makes it hard to track down problems if you're running multiple commandfiles at the same time, and creates a mess that will eventually need to be cleaned up.

The `launch_multi` script iterates through a set of commandfiles, and for each one, creates a directory in `$rundir` named after the commandfile and runs `launch_cf` on it from there, so all the captured output is neatly contained, making it easier to keep track of what's going on and simplifying cleanup when you're done.

To get access to all the software packages you need in the runtime environment (for this workflow, that includes CDO and NCO) `launch_cf` needs a script named `config_env.sh` in the directory where it is run with the appropriate `module load` commands (or `module restore default` if you're lazy) and `conda activate npl` for the Python scripts.  `launch_multi` will copy `~/config_env.sh` or you can specify it with `--config`.

`launch_multi` also copies the commandfile into the run directory, as well as any other needed scripts or files specified with `--copy`.  Making local copies avoids problems that can by a large number of processes all trying to read the same file at the same time.  (This is sort of the filesystem analog of running in a containerized environment.)

#### `postprocess.core.variables.py`

This script needs `conda activate npl` in the `config_env.sh` for libraries like `xarray` and `pandas`.  It reads `var_specs.yml` and calls `cmorize.compress.sh`.

Note that this script has a large memory footprint and takes a while to run, especially for precip.  (See example invocation in step 3.)
 

### List of current known problems: 
1.  Discrepancy in cell_methods from WRF output and WCRP guidelines

    There are currently disconnects for some variables between the attributes specified by the official WCRP JSON tables and the actual attributes of that variable as save by WRF.

    The post-processing script corrects the units of the core variables, but the temporal characteristics of the data many not match the specified `cell_methods` attribute. This is important, because it affects the time coordinates and bounds for those variables

    The current problematic variables are:

    a.  clt (cloud fraction)  
    b.  evspsbl (evaporation including subplimation and transpiration) 
